---
title: Syllabus
layout: default
---

<div id="toc">
[TOC]
</div>

## Grading

- Homeworks: 50% (8 of them)

- Quizzes: 30% (8 of them)

- Final exam: 20%

There is no midterm, per se. The quizzes, collectively, are your midterm.
Quizzes occur every Monday and test you on the topics from the prior week. They
are short (we still have lecture on Mondays, a quiz should only take at most 20
minutes), and are designed to reinforce the topics.

The final exam will look like several quizzes all in one test. So the format
will be just like the quizzes. Obviously, the final exam is "cumulative"
(covers everything we learn in the course).

You can see your grades on Carmen.

## Due dates

Homeworks are always due on a Friday, by 11:00pm. Your homework should be sent
to me by email: [joshuaeckroth@gmail.com](mailto:joshuaeckroth@gmail.com) (copy
& paste your code into the email, or attach your files).

Quizzes are always given on a Monday, in class.

This material will be challenging. Consider the class like a math or physics
class. It will require a lot of thinking, staring at the problem, trying things
and seeing if they work, etc. It's almost impossible to fake your way through
it. There are always many good ways to solve a programming problem, but in the
end your solution is either right or wrong (although I hate to say that).
Partial credit will be abundant, however. In more realistic situations
involving big projects and teams of programmers, how the problem is solved is
very important (and whether it's the right problem to solve is often unclear!)
but, naturally, this class is more focused on teaching you at least one right
way to solve the problem, and less about style.

Most students say that programming assignments take longer than they expected.
Trivial bugs in your code can cause you to waste hours attempting to fix your
program. So start early!

> **Hofstadter's Law** "It always takes longer than you expect, even when you
> take into account Hofstadter's Law." ---
> [G&ouml;del, Escher, Bach: An eternal golden braid](/biblio/geb)

Or if you prefer,

> **Murphy's law of Programming** "The sooner you start coding your program,
> the longer it is going to take." --- [The computer contradictionary](/biblio/contra)


## Text book

The book is not required, but you may find it highly useful. I generally follow
the book's organization, and most homeworks are straight from the book.
Probably any edition would be fine; I use the 7th edition.

[Walter Savitch, Problem Solving with C++, 7th Edition](http://www.amazon.com/Problem-Solving-7th-Walter-Savitch/dp/0321531345/ref=pd_sim_b_4)

## Academic misconduct policy

This course is designed for individual work. There are no group projects.

The only work required of you outside of class is homework assignments.
Obviously, there is no tolerance for cheating (looking at others' work) during
quizzes or the final exam. However, you may participate in a reasonable amount
of collaboration over homeworks. Collaboration is limited to: discussing how to
approach the solution, or how to solve small coding problems; looking at the
Internet for information about general topics, not solutions to the particulars
of the homework assignment. It is considered academic misconduct if you copy
significant portions of code from anyone (the Internet included). Your
solutions should not bear an uncanny resemblance to anyone else's code. It
should be clear to you what I mean by this; do not test the limits of this
(fairly liberal) policy. Violators will be referred to the OSU Committee on
Academic Misconduct (COAM).

